okay thank you everybody Welcome this is
the town of vover board of Finance uh
special budget Workshop meeting for
Wednesday April 10th
2024 um we'll go ahead and call the
meeting to order recite the Pledge of
Allegiance I pledge allegiance to the
flag United States of America and to the
Republic for which it stands one nation
go indivisible with liberty and justice
for all all
hey thank you we will go on to agenda
item two which is public speak so linda
looks like you're the only member of the
public um of the board have anything to
add nothing to
say okay thank you we'll go ahead and uh
and move on to our Workshop
then um I assume I'm not sure I don't
know if Kimberly or Jan will be joining
us um but we'll uh we'll go ahead and
get start as far as I know they will be
um yeah Eric if I could share my screen
I don't know if um it's enabled yet or
not hang on two
seconds
okay okay you should be seeing the Excel
sheet
now Okay so so yeah as I was mentioning
I think we we had
a spirited discussion about the uh
director of the wages for the director
of the community center and I think that
the consensus was that we would uh
decide we decided that we
would
uh kind of leave that in as it was and
leave it to the see what feedback we
might have gotten during the hearing and
also and if we don't have any then we
maybe leave it to the public vote in the
town budget meeting um so that's kind of
where we left that I don't think we
addressed anything specifically or
suggested any changes in the rest of the
line items for the community center uh
did anybody want to review that
again all
set a lot of this is swag we know
because it's not up and running so we
don't we don't know what electricity is
going to cost or the supplies and
everything and as Erica mentioned last
meeting we do have to do an initial
stocking so that's going to you know
potentially take a little more than it
might uh in a normal run R year but uh
it's going to be all be new so we'll
figure it
out okay if we move on to the 4199 a
section this is advertising this is the
legal advertising primarily I think
advertising um the uh the votes and the
various meetings that need to be posted
um probably some you know other openings
and things so Eric we're looking at no
change there it looks like yeah I mean
that th those are guesses that
fluctuates um so we have to do legal
notices for any land use board uh
anything that comes before significant
that comes before a land use board
requires a public hearing Town meetings
require advertisements the budget
requires
advertisements registar stuff there are
a lot of reasons the state makes us
advertise an awful lot of things um we
typically use the River East because it
has a wide circulation everybody in
Andover gets one for free um and it's a
relatively lowcost advertising means
there are it's almost three times as
much to use the ji uh for the same ad as
it is for the River East um we do
occasionally have to use the ji because
there are some things in the land use
realm that require two notices and with
very specific times between the two of
them and we can't satisfy that if we do
both of them with the River East so in
those cases we'll do one in the River
East and one in the ji but that's you
know I'm not anticipating we have a lot
more use this year so as long as they
don't raise the costs for their
advertising rates we should be
okay okay any questions on that
okay hearing none we'll move on to
insurance so we've got a 4.9% increase
in
Insurance
um as Eric note here Kera has a
three-year lock in we can't exceed
5% maybe lower but probably prudent to
uh to assume that rough increase there
anybody have any questions on that or
Eric do you have anything you want to
offer beyond that yeah and since I got
that note
um the two things so our insurance bill
is comprised of essentially three major
things the first is kerma workers comp
the second is kerma liability in
automotive and the third is the fire
department's esip uh
Insurance um so we don't have firm
numbers for any of those uh esip has
when we asked them said they anticipate
a 133% rate increase to 22,000 but we
don't have an actual contract kerma has
said we are going to be at the we are
going to be at the max of our three-year
lockin um and the reason is uh on the uh
workers
comp um you know we did have one fairly
significant claim from Public
Works
um you know that was cardiac
related and we did have on the other
side on the the lap side um we had a
significant claim for the plumbing
failure in the school because that
required an emergency clean up because
there was a lot of sewage uh in the
crawl
space so um basically based on this
year's claims they're going to be so
what I'm saying is that that our
insurance that number should be okay but
it's not going to go down okay what's
East that like Emergency Services
Insurance l or something yeah it's they
a lot of towns do that they separate out
the
uh um so the fire department still runs
off of our workers comp but everything
else related to their equipment uh is
covered by
EIP
okay any other questions for Eric on the
Insurance okay hearing none we'll move
down to benefits um I know probably some
of some of this is an estimate but uh
some of it's probably hard numbers
you've got Eric do you want to comment
on
this yeah so the the biggest chunk of
that is you know so secured in Med that
just relates directly to the raw income
that we have
um un unemployment compensation we don't
have firm numbers we never do it this
time of year um but based on the last
couple of years we've been putting quite
a bit more money into that than we've
actually getting charged so that's why I
reduced that uh down to
5,000 um the biggest chunk is health and
dental
insurance that still needs review um
Carol and I or Cheryl I plan on sitting
down and going over
that because I gave her the formulas I
used to do it and she had some concerns
with it um we know overall our perers
health care increase is going to be
around 16 between 16 and
16.5% um per the
Consortium um what we don't know is we
don't obviously that that also includes
the addition of one completely new
employee um and there's something wrong
with my math and I can't figure it out
so I've told Cheryl as soon as she gets
back which will be you know
uh not this coming week but the week
after that we're going to sit down and
review all the formulas because there's
still something wrong it just mentally
it doesn't add up that that should be a
42% increase unless we had last year's
numbers wrong um which is possible
um well we went down quite a bit you
know Health dental so um is the extra
employee you mentioned is that the
community service director or the
community building director yeah okay
yeah okay do we have any other questions
uh for Eric on this so we should
obviously flag that to come back to it
yeah absolutely yeah point and the other
thing I would just mention on the
unemployment comp um so we've been under
expending we've been budgeting too high
you've dropped it by half do you
anticipate we're sort of going to soak
up that a little bit and then maybe meet
in the middle and you know in future
years we might need 7,000 or 8,000
whatever instead of five or do you think
five is the real
number I mean I think five is the real
number our expenses the last two years
have been about five okay one a little
bit more one a little bit less I think
but there's no I don't see any real
Rhyme or Reason to why
uh you know okay that's I was just
curious as to whether how we were
handling it and now that you mention it
it was a silly question because this
isn't a fund this is operating budget so
we're not soaking up Surplus we're just
budgeting accurately so thank you
y other
questions I have a question mark I don't
know if am I visible can I you are now
yeah yes okay I had a heck of a time
getting in I don't know you know I I
tried to get in the meeting maybe 701 so
I apologize for my late arrival my I was
spinning I don't know so I kept logging
out and logging in um so I don't know
how much of the meeting I missed but I
thought I had put something on this
there's the disability insurance policy
Eric is which employees are are covered
under that Disability
Policy uh pretty much all the full-time
employees I know I had emailed you a
while ago I wasn't sure it um I had a
question of it obviously it's not a big
amount but I knew that
it's just a it's disability insurance I
guess for if someone is injured or can't
continue in their job that is the policy
yeah it's a long-term long-term
disability policy right and then I knew
short-term disability but we do maintain
long-term disability right and I I never
in looking at all the contracts and
everything I had never seen that as a
benefit so again I don't I just was
waiting for the question to get answered
so I figured i' ask it now so we provide
it even though we don't have to by
contract or anything like
that uh
correct yeah like I said it's not a big
dollar amount I just wanted thank you
right go ahead what were you gonna
say well I'm going to say that I would
never accepted my
contract without some sort of long-term
disability I would never have accepted
it structured the way it's structured
and the whole concept behind eventually
taking the entire town to just PTO in
instead of separate sick time plus
personal time plus vacation time
acrel um you know that implies that no
employee has that sick time bank to
cover them during extended outage which
is basically what long-term disability
policy so I think either you go one way
or the other you either go back to
traditional sick time for all
employees um if you're going to consider
getting rid of it um or you keep it
that's that's how I would look at it as
an employee certainly right and I
remember when we were in the contract
negotiations talking about that very
thing and um yeah like my town offers it
for employees but it's a they can buy it
for themselves like just like any other
person can yeah again I don't want to
make too big of it it's not a big line
item but I had emailed you several times
and I didn't get the answer so I figured
I'd ask now thank you yep is is it
something that um you know there's
employee contribution and then we cover
some I know in my company I buy whatever
the I don't even pay much attention to
it it's just a line item on my benefits
but every year I select it it's like a
60% salary uh for long-term disability
and it's you know it's negligible to me
but I'm assuming under the hood that the
employer kicks in something too is this
just our
share uh no that is the total cost okay
so okay it's a little different to
contribute to that generally not super
expensive stuff no oh no absolutely not
it's nothing you know I don't have any
problem with it I was just curious and
the only reason I bring it is when
you're sitting on a negotiations table
you know you just like to and I got to
know the contracts quite well so I just
had never seen that in there whereas
like in my contract we're able to like
Rob said you get to pay a portion the
town covers a portion but okay thank
you okay any other questions on the
insurance and benefits sorry benefits
and we talking
about
okay hearing none let's get down to the
Old Town
Hall uh so we have an increase in the
electricity anticipated cost based on
actual expenses this says
2223 so looks like trying to more
realistically estimate the uh the
expenses it's only a difference of less
than $500 but it is there
um and we also have a fuel oil budget
added in which looks like got missed
last year so occasionally get a fill up
this year as the tank is down okay Rob
you have a question yeah just the
Oldtown Hall you know that's that's the
is that the museum when we say the
Oldtown Hall that's the museum area
right that is correct that's the museum
building not the yeah the building we're
demoing okay just just checking okay
cool Eric did you have something to
comment on there
or no just just that that that's the
building um uh we
do we don't fill the tank every year um
because we we only use it occasionally
because it's only open in the winter
occasionally and it's nominally an
unheated building but they do fire up
the system if they're going to have a
Saturday open house so but I did look
we're down to just about a quarter of a
tank um so Scott said he typically fills
every second to third year so we're do
to fill the tank this
year question on that
area Okay move down to Town
garage
um just a couple of reductions here
otherwise it looks like it's
flat anybody have any questions on the
Town garage C
I was just wondering uh Eric is there
any plans
longterm um I just happen to be talking
to Jay today and you know understanding
you know the work that that place needs
is there is there a long-term plan for
that
garage of any type oh there's there's
kind of two things three things on my
medium-term radar for that building um
the first is something for the exterior
walls um
Martin uh has recommended that we simply
laugh and stucko the walls as the
easiest way to preserve the
exterior um I have a little bit of
concern with that because I think at the
same time we do it we want to consider
increasing the insulation of that
building too um in my head I would
probably you know uh use an exterior
foam insulation a rigid insulation and
go over that with vinyl sighing but you
know I I really need an engineer to
weigh in on that because I want to make
sure whatever we do doesn't affect the
long-term structure of the building and
since we're talking some of those
sections of the building go back to the
1850s you really have to be careful
about the permeability of the mortar and
the bricks and stuff like that so that's
one um the cold storage building
definitely needs a new roof um it's got
two layers on it already so you can't
re- roof over it it would have to be
torn down uh or torn off and re-roofed
so that is something that we should do
um that portion is not leaking the front
portion with the flat roof is completely
trashed um and to be honest the best
thing we can do with that is just tear
it down because structurally it's not
sound enough to for us to really want to
spend a bunch of time fixing it up um in
its marginally useful space so that
would be my you know kind of the three
things on my radar list for that um the
fourth thing is a replacement of the
generator for that facility because that
is a uh that generator is a little older
than I am um it was basically an army
surplus generator that they got about 30
years ago and that they've been using
ever since but the problem is it's not
uh it's not a stable enough electrical
generator that like they can't run any
of the computers or anything like that
it's too noisy of power they can use
power tools and they can open the garage
doors and stuff like that but it's not
fully functional so at some point we
ought to consider a generator upgrade um
for that building also does that answer
your question well I was just wondering
with with all those things like what is
the plan to fund all those things like I
don't see anything in here for like how
do we fund all that is or just going to
be a big Bill we get someday well no I
mean I I was planning on using a bigger
chunk of this year's Building
Maintenance
funds um
for public works oh okay um however the
board of Selectmen has made it clear
that they want to do the the uh gy floor
project um and the downdraft lit fans
for the gym out of that budget also so
um you know 35,000 of
my you know my 100,000 is already spoken
for so that's going to reduce my ability
to do stuff with that but um that was
those are the projects I'm kind of
looking at in this next iteration um
there's also a chance I can use some
lowp funds for some of that too um that
gets harder because if I use lowp funds
um and not internal Town dollars that
makes me uh I have to go through shipo
the state historic preservation Society
or office
and you know I I'm sure they're going to
refuse to allow me to tear down the
front facade if we touch any state
funding for that so um just a quick note
to is when I did that tour was that a
year or two ago I forget we had that
tour that uh Jay set up and that'd be
something I think all the board of
Finance people would definitely if he
does another one should go to just see
what condition that build is in uh
anyways that's my
thoughts yeah real quick uh two
questions one um the the generator and
replacement thereof is this a this I
assume is a gas generator or not a
propane uh it's a diesel generator
diesel yeah okay because there's already
going to be fuel tanks there
right right they they currently run it
off the same you know basically they're
running it off the home heating oil uh
okay tanks there okay and then the
because it's the same stuff right and
then the second question is I have a
vague memory in from CIP meetings from a
year or two ago was this the building
that needed
regrading and work on its exterior walls
to prevent um moisture getting up and
Wrecking its found not its found some
electrical work down out there too right
so yep it definitely does need that okay
so there's a to to Bill's Point like
there needs to be kind of a whole plan
for this
building that we should talk about in
the coming
years that was be my question I wasn't
able to make that tour and I really
wanted to I drive by there every day I
I'm just going to stop in or ask Jay if
I can come see it because I bill overall
is it in terrible shape I've heard
they've done so many improvements inside
too but I don't know yeah I mean no they
Jay's done a lot of work in that place
and he's cleaned it up done a great job
but he can point out the shortcomings
right and I'm not sit here and try and
remember all of them but you know as
Eric just talked to there are there are
needs for that building um so anyways
it's just I was just wondering how we
plan to pay for some of those and this
is one of these things where we need to
kind of figure out what the what the
overall plan is and then the building
equipment fund is going to need funding
to measure with that at some point
espe prioritizing yeah yeah well when
Eric says you know part of that building
is from 1850 that kind of makes you
think oh yeah definitely like I yeah
yeah understood yeah I just have to go
see it for myself too to kind of get a
better because they've
talked no yeah and don't think that we
haven't been putting a fair amount of
money into that building um that
building has had some really extensive
electrical
upgrades um both bathrooms have been
fully remodeled because they were
remember you know absolutely disgusting
um not that I take credit for that um
there's been a new locker and storage
area that's what I heard about yeah um
we've poured a bunch of concrete in
there to level off the floors um we've
done a complete lighting upgrade in the
building we've replaced the roof of the
main you know area um we've added
another door in the back so we have been
putting quite a bit of money into the
building we're just kind of doing it
over time we have excess money available
in the building maintenance fund um sure
there are some big ticket items
um you know and it's just a question of
prioritizing um you know and and looking
for what things we can fund without
tripping you know requirements of State
oh
yeah yeah and and last question um the
diesel tanks there are theys are they
above ground
yes all our tanks are above ground
there's a big diesel fuel tank double
wall fuel tank outside and then the oil
tank is an above ground indoor
tank a big one but you
know yeah no you know that's that's the
main question I'm just thinking about
Legacy uh issues from you know past
years I mean you talking about a
building of that age um even even a
building 100 years newer than that I'd
be thinking about what was there before
and what happens if you stick a shovel
on the ground um oh just a thought
absolutely I mean I could not believe
that place would not be uh a Brownfield
if you ever wanted to use it for some
other
occupation um the the good news and the
bad news is it's right next to a
river right and the joke the the
solution to pollution is delution comes
into play uh but yeah uh so what we
think about this plan what think about
that too but that's down the road
thanks okay other questions about the uh
Town
garage all right hearing none we'll move
on to the Old
Firehouse
so we've got reductions there with a
note that hopefully we can dump I want
to avoid this ongoing cost
so Eric a question about that I know we
had a a plan to rebuild that Eric and I
know part of that money was a a grant
that's kind of based on us spending
money on the museum I believe if right
memory surgy can you talk to that just a
bit on where we are with that sure
so
so that thing's that's kind of a cluster
um I'm willing to admit so I still don't
have final approval from shipo over
our
uh what we had to submit to shipo is
this giant set of documentation about a
building because anytime you tear down a
historic structure you have to show you
have to have like all this documentation
about what you're tearing down so we
have submitted that to shipo like six or
seven months ago and um when I followed
up with them several months ago they
still hadn't reviewed it um which does
not make me happy
um
we're the the other thing that affects
us dramatically on that property is that
um when I went to uh the a
agency that deals with prevailing wage
in the state that has ultimate authority
over that um I was I asked for a ruling
and was told that that cannot be
considered new construction because
there's an existing building on site um
and I asked for legal interpretation
because as far as I'm concerned if you
tear down the entire building and you
don't reuse the walls or the foundation
or the slab or any utilities or anything
you know you're building something new
right you're not reusing anything over
maybe the dirt that was under the
building um but you know they they have
said in no uncertain terms that that's
uh new construction uh or that's you
know not new construction as far as
they're concerned um the head of that
agency told me basically verbally that
you know unless we were doing something
in primeval Forest um it was going to be
you know uh it was not going to be
considered new
construction um which is nuts but you
know her
husband you know is the head of the
Union trade Association uh in the state
of Connecticut so I mean their agency
head is as Pro Union as you could
imagine so that is going to drive our
cost up for that project um I'm not sure
how much I had
anticipated um I had budgeted based on
it not being a prevailing wage job and
not having to deal with shipo
um you
know my thought at this point is um I'm
about to submit a for congressionally
directed
funding um to pay for the community
center
and the generator that will cover the
community center the fire department in
the town hall um and if I do that then
we have plenty of excess money in the
multi-use building fund to absorb any
increase in costs in that building so I
have kind of a plan in my head of how I
can make this all work um but if that
doesn't come to fruition then I would be
going back to the board at some point
saying hey here's what our actual costs
are here's what it's going to cost the
town you know do we proceed or do we bag
this got you so thank you
yeah I have a question yeah go ahead L
um just got a curiosity what does the
electricity actually what are you
actually paying for what electricity is
actually in that building because it's a
vacant building so we haven't dropped
the service and the reason we haven't
dropped the service is that when we go
to do the asbest of batement we need
water and we need electrical service on
site to do the asbest abatement and the
reason I didn't drop it a while back was
because I was anticipating having done
it already um and frankly as soon as
shipo gives us the authority we will go
out to RFP for the demo contract so I'd
like to do that regardless of what else
we do with that space and how we finish
it off we're going to demo it anyway so
I've been keeping the utility on in
anticipation of that I certainly hadn't
expected it to take me as long as it has
to get to this point um but anything to
do with the state takes a long
time
agreed thank you
yep
okay any other
questions hopefully we'll be to point
some point where we don't have to
include these line
items all right uh auditor actuary we'
got a small 5% increase assumed uh we
don't have a contract obviously
so seems prudent any questions about
that so one of the things I would say is
that um since it is the board of
finances you know decision to hire or
not the auditor um I'm assuming since
we've gotten to this point you're happy
in that you as a board want to renew the
services of the auditor for next year um
if so your next regular meeting you
should probably motion to that effect
because the state's already bugging me
for to declare who's our auditor for the
cycle yeah make it makes sense can you
make sure we get that added to our
agenda for the April meeting
okay other
questions okay Town
attorney
um so we have a note we have a 7.1%
increase in the budget it's 14, 15,000
it's not a big deal increase in fees
from Dennis O'Brien 1,000 rest is for
labor attorney and occasional land land
use so all right nothing and then we
have not a not a revaluation year so we
don't have too many concerns of the
assessments uh legal fees so that's
staying flat okay any questions on
this none nope okay move on to town
engineer um we're flat here
too
there no questions we'll talk to Probate
Court looks like we have a small
increase $100 nothing
significant
okay moving up to the capital region
Council of governments so that's what
sir Cog is uh and remember capital is
Connecticut conference and
municipalities is that what CCM is I
don't know is
yeah cost is Council of small towns
they're kind of like the lobbying arm
for small towns in Connecticut got it
got it so we have these are all
membership fees I assume correct yeah
correct so it's small increase don't
really know what all of them are so okay
seems reasonable it's not a not a whole
lot of
money yeah CCM has not actually passed a
budget uh yet so I don't have that final
number but it's not going to be much of
an
increase
okay no questions we move on to public
works
so not really a whole lot of change here
um there a vehicle maintenance up 15%
you know couple thousand dollars tires
accounting for the difference as Eric
mentioned tires are bloody expensive I
just had to replace a two-month old Tire
because I got a big piece of metal in it
uh I think the general costs are just
really high just because they're still
the the raw material cost the carbon
black and stuff is still driving the
cost of tires up but anyway that's my
personal observation so I can relate to
that
[Music]
um increase in diesel
alde yeah so you know because we never
drain the tank completely we do uh get
our diesel tested twice a year um in the
winter we because it's an exterior tank
it's still cold enough here that we need
to add the anti-gel uh stuff to it so
that stuff's fairly
expensive um and we also do add
algicide um to the tank just to prevent
algae growth because algae does Believe
It or Not poly live in diesel tanks
um and it's really uh it really messes
up the engine um if you start sucking
algae in do you not want that in your
fuel injectors and your fuel filters no
it may be helpful when you're trying to
clean up a mess but that the critters
like to eat diesel
but in your
engine I I don't think I realized that
we needed to do that consistently okay
yep noting this increase in signage
costs under the equipment line what's
what what do we what signage do we put
in
so the side of the trucks or something
no that that's like
uh um
the you know the basic stop signs and
all of that kind of stuff oh oh oh okay
so road signs
they yeah and
we we have more signs stolen than you
would think um we actually spend an
amount of money that annoys me um for
replacing signs that get stolen signs
that get deliberately run over cones and
barrels that get thrown in the river or
thrown somewhere where we can't find
them anymore um it's it's it's quite
annoying actually
it's you know how many slow chill signs
can we possibly have
um sorry uh going back my fraternity
days um that's that is irritating though
so we're we're having to replace
consistently a few signs a year
or oh yeah way more than that um wow and
part of it is that we are slowly
upgrading our like our stop signs a lot
of them don't meet the new reflectivity
standards so there's some stuff we're
building in just because of its age but
we actually have a bunch of stuff
there's a couple spots where we've
consistently had problems like uh con
and Gilead that
intersection we those signs stolen and
taken away um on a fairly frequent basis
because you know 30 years ago it was
only a a two-way stop
yeah um and now we made it a four-way
stop and that makes people angry because
they remember the good old days when
they didn't have to stop so they just
steal think well there's no sign now I
don't have to stop anymore that's what's
going on oh my God we have to Doc I live
on Gilead I never realized that that's
bizarre yeah we had the same problem it
was you know teenagers being idiots I
didn't yeah and we had that problem on
Long Hill um where Long Hill and hendy
intersect that used to be yield in all
directions and then they put a stop sign
on two sides um and that got people
angry so those signs got stolen a lot
for years wow that is definitely
different I was just down there the
other day yeah I'm like I don't think it
was like this yeah guys I'm gonna
suggest we gota stay focused and try to
move along got a lot to
cover so I have a question thank you um
Eric just can you remind me I mean in
just a brief because I was looking at
the salaries that make up the public
work salary I understand we have Jay and
then we have I believe a fourman crew so
that they can and did someone go I know
we have a maintainer one two three did
anyone go up a level in the past year
that maybe was a one before I don't want
to name names I thought I saw more twos
it just looked like a bigger bump than
when I was looking at the year so did
anyone have a
race uh
not there's no level change projected in
next
years uh one employee Rich was bumped up
to maintainer two I don't know whether
that was last year's budget I think that
was last year's budget that he got
bumped to maintainer to and I think we
created or I'm not we but there's a new
wasn't the three added or something at
one point there was just two levels and
now there's three or maybe uh no
actually there's always been four levels
oh um but we don't ever stock
essentially put anybody in the fourth
level because the fourth level was what
we used before we had a public works
supervisor when we still had a a union
position holding that top level kind of
manager position gotcha so we're not we
haven't had a maintainer for essentially
um yeah that's basically maintainer one
maintainer two lead maintainer and then
like uh supervisor
cental okay all right thanks there was
some bump somewhere that I couldn't get
to make sense to me but I'm sure it's
fine thank you
yep any other questions or comments on
the Public Works
section okay so we'll go down to snow
removal uh not really a lot of change
here saning equipment's gone up a little
bit small hand winter equipment needed
so I'm sure there are small hand
sanders and meals new contract increase
I assume that was meant to say contract
not contact yeah correct
yeah uh questions on this
portion
no
NOP okay I guess we move on to transfer
station
so very minor change in the
wages maintenance you got 20% there
another $500 not a lot noting here we're
going to need some pavement repair I
assume that's just patching that the
Public Works does ER that is we do have
some issues there which occurred last
year basically we got a pretty bad bad
rat
infestation and the Rats had gotten
through the side of the block walls and
they were hollowing it out back there um
and pushing the sand out the cracks so
they can make nice big
nests um so we have added a you know a
pest removal service to the transfer
station um you
know
but okay so we will have to do some
patching is what I say but nothing super
significant nothing Public Works gain at
all okay good questions anybody why
would the electricity go
down uh
because good question maybe actuals or
something you know so so first of all
last year we were going into a year
where the electrical costs were
spiking um it was kind of hard to
determine where they were going overall
so we've kept that high for a couple of
years but you know we've got enough
historic data since the time that we
have changed over the electrical
system um in that and and rebuilt that
that I'm that I'm confident that we can
get away with the lower number there
based on past
usage so they'll probably be consistent
for next year as well
presumably unless you know unless the
utility company um
unless we get a spike either in Supply
or delivery charges from the utility
company which is always possible
okay okay other
questions no okay move on to
recycling um so we have an increase of
7.1 % hazardous waste have note there
that The midn Rock contract one more
year to go on the existing
contract um that's our contractor for
picking up hazard waste also increase on
antifreeze used
oil tire pickup
okay so again not a lot of money
increase here you're talking about you
know less than $800 All
In anybody have any questions or
concerns not there
no
[Music]
okay ground care so we have mowing
that's flat that's
the contract with clero and estimate
from the heat parks and wreck you
spelled that correctly too there
mark
contract yeah Eric is that for the the
field um that is that is that line item
is mostly field related but it also
covers the town's regular mowing which
we sub out to end over
Landscaping okay because didn't aren't
we buying a new mower
tractor that's the roads side sorry
thank you that's the road side yeah
okay and then the old Cemetery
maintenance the Grant that's in there
was that grant for more than a year I
thought that was you know was it a
two-year Grant
so generally speaking and I'm guessing
but generally speaking we've been able
to get that Grant pretty much every
single year so I'm assuming that we're
going to get that um but we're only GNA
spend that line item if we get the grant
good that's my point yeah yeah right if
we don't get the grant we're only going
to spend you know we typically spend put
a couple thousand dollars in down money
into the old Cemetery
meetings yeah that's what I remembered
and we only bumped it up to the seven
because we got the Grant and we wanted
to account for it correct okay but then
all
right is it a little misleading to the
town that we're putting it as an expend
I don't know I mean as I mean I know
you'll remember it I'll remember it but
we're counting it as an expense as we
need 7,000 but right but yeah you know
that's fund accounting you know I
understand understand
yeah yeah
okay any other questions yeah I'm
curious um are there any grants out
there for any type of beautification
especially when you're putting in a new
building and there's new plantings and
things like
that not that I mean I you could go
after maybe Hartford foundation for
public giving I mean I think if I
wouldn't have done it necessarily for
the beautification portion um I think if
we don't get the Congressional set aside
I'm G to go after money from the
Hartford foundation for public giving
for the kitchen for the community center
and see whether they'll cough up the
money to fund that um because I know
they funded that in other senior centers
um but honestly I've never really looked
for Grants specifically for
beautification
um when you
say are you putting in trees or are you
talking
flowers for limited
plantings so right now we are for the
community center we are going to put top
soil down and grass seed and maybe maybe
one tree in the middle of the turnaround
and that's it um everything after that
has got to come out of the
beautification budget because we just
don't have we don't really have another
source of funding for that okay um it'd
be nice to maybe get the town involved
in something like that because I
remember when the Hartford opened up in
um Windsor I was working with the old
facility and they actually had employees
come over and do plantings
and it was kind of a cool thing where
people got involved with what it looked
like yeah I mean yeah I was thinking
that would be a nice thing too for the
town and the public maybe you know
people that like that kind of thing yeah
I mean beautification is a
beautification committee that's not
money I spend that's money uh you know
the beautification committee spends on
keeping up the plantings around around
town right um so I think you could
certainly you know have involvement with
the beautification if there's specific
things you want to accomplish I mean in
truth Kathy do roa's sense of design is
a hell of a lot better than me so I tend
to rely on her for you know and let them
do whatever they want to do in terms of
plantings and that's what I would do
here and I can tell you she's always
looking for more hands so if you have
more than ideas and you have muscle
she'll take it doie I'll come help her
all right I'm not good with the design
sense but I can help because right now
in all honesty it's it's a lot of old
ladies and me but yeah we could always
use more help there not just opinions
but help I resembl that remark okay all
right should we move on if you guys are
okay with that yep yep yep okay Street
lighting we've gone down from 10,000 to
about 5,000 um so Eric is noting need
better numbers for electrical cost did
we just over budget last year what's uh
yeah we did um and for whatever reason
even when you know our cost should have
spiked really dramatically last year
because utility company went up like
48% on their uh you know on their supply
costs which is a little more than half
of the total cost for electricity but
for whatever reason it was not reflected
in our street lighting bills and our
street lighting is the one thing where
we pay for the electricity through
eversource not through a third-party
supplier so for the life of me I don't
know why that didn't go up significantly
last year but it did not so um in fact
it was lower than the year before which
makes no sense um but you know we put
together 12 months of bills you know and
did kind of a historical look at it so
unless something changes you know 5,000
seems appropriate for that or you know
uh a little bit more than that
6,500 um Eric did did we use the same
level of kilowatt hours we've used in
the past or did we like switch over to
LEDs and use less power
so that's a good question we did they
did when they replaced the lights here
in front of town hall they did put LEDs
in those um so that might account for
some of that we'd already done LED
street light up you know all our
streetlight street lights are LEDs the
only non- LEDs we have now are the the
existing spotlights on the athletic
fields
um
you know so that's my only thought as to
why we might have seen a reduction when
we when you have the the rate increase
is that you know even as my power usage
in my own home has changed over the
years is one of the big things I think
is that just about every light in this
house now is LED and they just use
dramatically less power so maybe that's
it I don't know it was just a thought
yeah I mean
sodium oh I was say high pressure sodium
versus LED is a huge huge difference
yeah
so okay so are we good with this one
should we move on move
on okay the custodian cost we have a
pretty significant cost here um and as
noted I think we talked about this
before uh there's a salary increase plus
the increase in hours of completing
cleaning the community center uh for the
year questions
there is that regular
M or is it because of all the um
construction that they're doing right
now budgeting for the annual cost right
Eric you're gonna have to clean it a
couple of times a week somebody's got to
go in and do the floors and clean the
bathrooms and do all that so that's what
what that cost is and you know a year
from now that may be adjusted up or down
once we understand how often it's going
to be used um and what the maintenance
schedule has to be I mean I sat down
with Willie and went over the building
and said okay you know how often do you
think let's assume you know we have this
thing open during the week um and we're
doing evening programming too you know
how often do you really think you need
to maintain it and he said well I think
probably you're looking at two days a
week um you know and so we kind of
budgeted for
that yeah I mean I think we this along
with the whole section on the to the
town community center is that we're
throwing darts at a board right now and
once we are a couple years into it we'll
have a much better
idea things are reasonable other
questions
okay resident trooper so this kind of is
what it is we don't know what the cost
is going to be right Eric you want to
elaborate yep I mean so assuming we keep
our existing resident state
trooper looking at the the actual cost
and overhead associated with that
employee again the state police doesn't
make the final determination on the
rates to later in the year um but
presuming they don't change that
radically we can live with the same
budget and we we've been at roughly 140
for the last couple
years uh we were at 140 last
year um it dropped down a few years back
we had a resident state trooper that had
a lot of
seniority and he was a relatively more
expensive employee yep when when we got
uh Trooper Nessie our cost dropped
pretty significantly because he's a much
he has much less seniority I I do
remember that so yeah it's always a
crapshoot um but if we keep the our
current Trooper we we expect the cost to
be flat
roughly correct
okay other
questions okay fire department Fire
Commission so we've got about a 99.4%
increase this is actually one where we
probably wouldn't haveand I don't think
we uh talked about having somebody from
the Fire Commission come here and
explain this I don't know Eric if you
can address it or we need to have
somebody uh come here and kind of talk
about it or give us an explanation and
writing I mean I can if you continue on
while you're looking at that I can pull
up I should be able to pull up what the
Fire Commission gave me for
justification for that
hey Eric I just got a text from Joan she
said can you have Eric let me back into
the meeting please are we allowing
people yeah wow I didn't realize she
even dropped off
yikes yeah I don't know how we didn't
flag this
one it must just not have been quite on
our
threshold where we took our top 10 yeah
wasn't I think I think in retrospect we
would have wanted them to come and talk
to us oops
can someone let me know what we're
discussing now I got we're on the fire
department at this point Joan thank you
took me forever to get back in yeah the
uh you know we just talked about
resident trooper I don't know when you
dropped out but we just noted that we
really don't have a cost until you know
we're certain who the trooper is and
that the so now on the fire department
noting that they had a pretty
significant increase request at
99.4% uh which is the equivalent of
about
$15,000
so we were wondering if Eric had some of
the rationale behind that or if we
should have somebody from the Fire
Commission come and explain uh the basis
for that uh request
increase thank you for that back I was
at the town hall yesterday so I have a
question um
and that would be great we it would be
nice to see which line items make up
Eric are there people in the fire house
every day I I should know this being a
town resident are there actual people
there
or uh no we
don't no the answer is no there are not
people there all the time um often
whoever the officer is that is on on
duty will stop by at least a couple
times during the day and then you have
call outs we typically have at least one
call out for the ambulance service a day
so you you will often see that going out
um so if you see a bunch of cars parked
there that's usually what that is I have
their actual request but I don't have
their breakdown um I can either get that
from Wall-E um and I suspect it's my
problem because I'm sure
I got it from him um I don't know why I
don't have it in my budget folder um or
you can ask and I will have Wall-E
attend the next uh meeting if you want
to discuss the fire commission's budget
direct that would that would be my
suggestion is that we just kind of skip
over this and ask for him to come in and
explain because it's a significant part
of the Town budget it's a significant
increase we should know why sure agree
yeah and Mark I asked that question too
cuz I kind of want to understand how it
works too yeah it was interesting to me
cuz I was thinking I would have walked
over yeah just like is there one person
on a yeah salary but we'll see that next
time yeah I mean anytime you talking
about almost a 10% increase you know you
want to know why a significant amount of
money yeah well if it's significant yeah
not a $100 but right yeah you know on
the other hand the entire fire
department costs us roughly the same
amount of money as a single resident
state in a vehicle don't even go there
play with me don't get me
started we all saw that we all saw the
public response when there was
discussion about removing the state
trooper from the budget before so no
actually I wasn't going that way with it
I was going to say that overall the fact
that we've been able to
maintain a fire department as
inexpensively as we have um there are
not many towns that have been successful
staying 100% volunteer for fire
department and ambulance services um and
I do know that it would not be a
surprise if in four or five years they
no longer had enough members to run it
as completely
voluntary that's I want to know the
history and I'll do that on my own I I'm
fascinated by it so I want to know how
it runs just and you said you get about
a an ambulance call a
day yeah
probably
sure and that's the vast majority I mean
I looked into this a while back and you
know it's been decades since fire
departments spent most of their time
actually fighting fires it's almost
always uh weighted toward medical calls
right accidents yeah we should car
accidents Medical calls those are but
yeah I mean it would be good to just
hear from Wally I mean I don't expect to
grill the guy but you know just to to
find out you know we've been going up
slowly and then this is a bit of a spike
so
yep okay we'll table that discussion for
uh next week then just going to
highlight this as something to talk
about
um animal control from niog went up 20%
Couple Grand so uh you have a note here
Eric agreement with the Hein fell
through this is the bill from theod to
do so we had we had tried to set up a
Consortium with two of our neighboring
towns um to get away from the regional
an control operation just because
they're so far away from us that it
makes it tougher getting support with
endover and if they pick up a dog the
closest the dog is going to be is in
Norwich so a resident has to go a long
way to get their poot back um which you
know is a good Learning lesson if
nothing else but that's what I think
true but you know the other issue is
that the services they provide R limited
a lot of acos will deal with uh
roadkill um that kind of stuff um and
you know nuisance wildlife and you know
we really don't get that out of our uh
out of neog's animal control service
they do the absolute minimum required by
the state and they bill us based on that
but ultimately the three towns couldn't
agree onir figuring out how to do it um
we even had a little outside grant
funding that would have been applied to
a new three town organization but Hein
backed out and without Hein the other
two two couldn't pull it off so we're
just stuck with
knog that's too bad I mean does does he
have a pound is that is that the issue
is that Hein would have the containment
facility yes and that is part of the
problem is that the
the state in their Infinite Wisdom made
a decision last year they changed the
standards for animal control
facilities um you know they changed the
the fencing requirements they changed
the Run requirements Animal Control
facilities now all have to have air
conditioning um so there's a bunch of
stuff that got put down on that's why
we've we've kind of decommissioned our
pound completely so we don't even we
won't wouldn't even use it in an
emergency because it would cost us too
much money to meet state
standard um so that's part of the thing
that's killing you know uh and that's
part of the reason why nikog has
increased in cost this year because they
also have to their pounds now have to
meet that increased uh requirement
also got
it was the other Town Marboro or was it
a different town uh Colombia was gonna
be end over Columbia and
ebrin okay all right suggest we move on
from this sounds like we understand that
one I just got a text from Joan her
computer shut down she's going to try to
log back
in uh having trouble tonight yeah uh
Fire Marshall minimal increase 3% on the
salaries and a little bit on the D
memberships is $25 it jacked up the
percentage any concerns over the Fire
Marshall
section
nope okay uh a senior citizen so we've
got a small increase in the uh
coordinator I think that's what this is
yeah and then U Senor lunch up quite a
bit and Eric has the note unknown as we
shift to the community center we keep
consistently underfunding this last year
we spent about 5,500 bucks so you know
looks reason
me we underfunded it by a
lot so obviously food costs have gone up
pretty
considerably the seniors in have managed
to fund raise a pretty significant
fraction of the cost of the senior
luncheon
program um but year overy year we're not
we're not fundraising more but our costs
have gone up a lot so even though the
total cost of the program has only gone
up like
30% the cost they can't Grant fund or
can't fund um has gone up a lot so
that's really what what we're looking
at um but I mean should be budgeting as
to actual expenditure uh correct you
know let's let's get
real
yeah it's just yeah it's a ey popping
percentage but it is what it
is right and same thing with the program
reason we built that Senior Center and
we do these programs yeah so right so
the next line I'm also 50% again is that
just we're consistently o overex
expending yeah yeah for the the programs
the programs yeah yeah well so what I'm
trying to do is whoever walks into the
job um of running the senior center I
want to give them enough of a budget
because one of the things I want to do
is I want to get away from the range of
programming where we are now because
what we're what we're capturing
is the less active senior population
you know and I want to start increasing
some programming that catches the more
active portion of the retiree population
and I think we're going to need some
extra money if we're g to we're going to
do that so I'm trying to give them
enough funding so that they can do that
uh as part of the the new community
center Senor yeah
okay any further questions on the senior
citizens uh
budget okay looking at senior
transportation we got a big jump we
think talked a little bit about this
maybe but uh Eric do you want to just
kind of Hit the highlights here
sure um you know every year I ask
department heads for the
budget and pretty much every
year they return a flatline budget from
the year year before
um but it's not a realistic budget
because every year we end up pulling
money from somewhere else to supplement
that so I finally said okay you know I'm
I'm sick of putting up with that and I
took the last year and we looked at how
many total driver hours that we ran last
year um and we
also realized that our oldest senior
Transportation driver not oldest but
person who' been driving us for a long
time had been hired at a really low
salary an hourly range
initially um and then all the subsequent
employees had been hired at a higher
rate because that's what we had to do if
we were going to get them to you know so
we still have one driver that's making
like four bucks an hour less than all
the other drivers and she's the driver
that's been driving us for the for the
longest period so we're going to level
her hourly wage with the rest of them
and then because I think that's only
fair um and then look at how many hours
we actually drive with this
program now it does look like I've
filled out the paperwork this week for
the you know because we do get
reimbursed a portion of our costs and we
can get reimbursed up to a half the toal
total cost but it looks like they're
actually capping how much they're going
to give back so we're actually probably
going to get back around
$10,000 so we're going to spend 44 but
about 10 of that's going to come from a
grant so under this
scenario okay Mark can I ask one
question I I'll make it very quick I I
miss it looks like are you able to
scroll up a little bit I know you're on
the
transportation
so
um the resident services coordinator
position I know you talked did you have
a discussion about that at all was that
the stapen I was asking about last yep
that is a Sten right and I I never want
to single out
employees um there was
some I'll probably Circle back to it
next week but when I went after the
meeting I went looking at it and I
thought that that person I understand
those you know the serious things that
they take care of that you talked about
obviously the town has to have a person
to take care of that but I had thought
there was some other duties attached to
that that was senior transportation and
things that were going to be moved to
the community
center um so maybe I'll
take so is this stien just for those
smaller things or is this person also
helping helping with the transport ation
and all of the things that were listed
on the budget in the
past no I I think the
the there are several things by law we
have to have um you know so I look at
resident services coordinator as being
the municipal agent for the elderly yeah
you know that's one state required
they're kind of key part of our hoarding
task force um they deal with all the
renters rebate they deal with all the
fuel assistance stuff and there's a
series of things along that which are
lumped into that we used to have a
standalone employee that worked just a
few hours a week that did that but the
the problem I had with that is people
would always come in asking to talk to
the person and then you got to say no
that person only works Wednesdays from
3: to 5: or whatever so one of the
reasons why I wanted to assign that to
one of our full-time people is because
when the Town Hall's open most of the
time I want somebody to be able to walk
in off the street and actually speak to
the resident services coordinator so
that's kind of why I've structured it
the way I've structured it and I get it
I know we've talked about it before I
think it is a good service you know or I
I imagine it's not like you said it's
not an all thetime thing but it has to
be available when it's needed um no
thank you for clarification and circling
back that was one of the things I was
going to touch on thank you
Mark
okay um we talked about the senior
[Music]
Transportation um there's no more
questions on that we go on to the health
officer you got a
small percentage it says the Eastern
Highland Health District uh budget has
been adopted so I guess that's pretty
solid as our contribution
yep um I don't see anything really to
discuss there uh amplify mental health
services so you have a slight reduction
there that's just again $30 it's not
really affecting any
significant yep
um Social
Services um so we're jumping up a little
bit this is request from the access
Community a agencies which you've got
there so it's 600 bucks you're jumping
from
400,000 again it's a big jump but not
huge dollars I
guess correct so access
agency is one of our primary social
services
agencies um it's one one of those things
that a town is required to have but by
using a regional organization which
access is we satisfy that from the
town's perspective um the vast majority
of their funding comes through the state
not from the town they ask for a pretty
modest portion of their budget from the
towns that they serve
so they did ask for a lot more this year
though I'm not surprised
okay all right if no questions I guess
we can go ahead and roll down there ahm
Services y we ever in the past we always
used to have ahm come and present were
we doing that this
year uh you all got an invite to their
budget
presentation uh but nobody took them up
on it
oops Eric I felt bad I was supposed to
attend in said I and then you know I
didn't put it on my C calendar so I do
did yeah yeah they always send us the
spreadsheet or something if I if I had
to guess it's ongoing you know mental
health kind of stuff um you know we've
seen this the last few
years yeah they usually send a send a
budget over you know and then as Eric
mentioned they have a budget
presentation which if you you know could
go to but it's pretty self-explanatory
generally they do pretty good job of it
and I sure as heck don't want to run my
own Youth Services Agency yes because
that's
complicated goodness no they're great
you don't want to do that Eric no hm is
excellent I just you know we due
diligence
yeah all right so if there's no more
questions we can go ahead and keep
rolling forward we have the selectman
looks like we've got a reduction in the
salary
amount sure Mr McGuire has indicated he
is not interested in drawing a salary
therefore that's removed from the budget
so that's okay took it out Flatline for
four of them um and he does not take a
salary
okay uh Board of Finance I mean we had
the clerk wages we don't really see any
change there we just budget where we
where we
are yeah I'm not anticipating upping the
per meeting stipend so as long as we
keep running roughly the same number of
meetings there's no need to increase
those
budgets and we're fine we haven't really
used the
legal
y kind of a that was a we were jumping
at Shadows a little bit discussion a
couple years
ago sense at a time but you know we've
moved
Beyond uh Conservation Commission you
know
flat I guess we can move on if nobody's
got questions about that board of
assessment appeals we've got some minor
dollar amount increases in the salary uh
and some training costs you know 400
bucks or so I mean
ibody have any questions on
that all right hearing none zoning board
of appeals flat they really we get flat
until we get to down to the recreation
Mission um we've got a little bit of a
bump couple thousand
$1,500 um so outside facility rental so
this it says wiggle room for incoming
Center Director so I guess Eric what
you're suggesting is we might want to
bump up the uh budget slightly in case
with the new director we have more
external activities that would require
external facility rals correct okay and
I I'm just overall I want to give them
enough an operating budget the first
year that um you know that they can
function and they could legitimately
increase their overall
programming um and I don't know exactly
what that's going to look like I mean
it's really going to be highly dependent
on who we get for the
director sure Community Gardens going up
high percentage not a ton of money um is
that something that's taken
off
you know it's really growing they seem
to be doing more work just in terms of
the you know it's not a huge amount of
money but
they no pun intended on it seems to be
growing that was not intended actually
that's sad that's sad I wish I had
intended it they've got nice raised beds
and they've got some watering facilities
and stuff there inside so you know yeah
I mean I'm I like the idea I just I'm
curious you know it's a doubling a
little more than doubling of the budget
so I mean it's small in dollars but you
know if it's going well
great there's been a lot of volunteer
work over there too oh yeah more is
needed
unfortunately but I I think it's a good
mix with the the center I mean it's all
I think so good good Synergy and dynamic
could could work there well so I have I
have a question about the rec center the
recre will that eventually go away after
the community center person takes
charge will what go away the Recreation
Commission no no absolutely not I mean I
want the Recreation
Commission to you know make the
decisions but I don't necessarily want
the wreck commission to have to do all
their own scheduling I want somebody
doing that for them but I want the rec
commission working with them on what Pro
programming to provide and things of
that nature which is very similar to
what's happening now
um you
know all
right okay so we get a bunch of zeros
and negatives coming up yeah
nice zero it
yep get down to the bridg and Culver
fund here we go Capital there we go oh
boy all right let's see where we are the
big ones all right I mean it you know
that absolutely makes sense we've been
talking about the culs for a
while went over that when we had our the
whole issue where the requirements have
changed
for uh doing those those projects and
and the and the result on the cost uh
has been repeatedly discussed it's just
unfortunate um yeah before we even get
there we've got a we've also got a 99.6%
on the fire engine
fund um so that could be something the
fire commissioner talks about as well is
that that is that associated with the
the new truck though um isn't that just
math part of it I think that's less than
100 though is 80 something per years
can't remember what that yeah that's
part of it is that um we have a good
amount of money in the fund right now
and the cost per year for the truck for
the next 10 years is going to be around
$125,000 yep
so if we keep it at
$125,000 we're Sally saying the only
thing we're ever going to do is truck is
that that's realistic I think it needs
to go up a little bit um but you know
we've also told them that we've given
them basically two really big ticket
items in the last four years essentially
so they're going to have to keep it
really reasonable about what else they
get yeah I mean that makes sense to me
in that you know if we don't do this
we're just treading water on the leaste
cost of the trucks we have so if we're
the the purpose of these funds to set
aside hopefully for the future at least
that's my goal so I for one if we have
room in the budget we'll see how this
goes at at the budget hearing and the
and the town meeting but if we have the
room to do it uh yeah I'm I'm strongly
in favor of trying to pad this a little
bit so that we have some money going in
there that isn't just a pass through for
the least
cost
um proposing any changes to this at this
point are you rob no I'm not I'm I'm
supporting it I'm saying it's I think
it's the right call it it's it's a bit
of a you know it's it's a non-negligible
increase it's it's not crazy though and
I think it takes into account our our
real needs uh the the fact of the matter
is that the last truck that we
got years ago when we first developed
the Fire Equipment fund Capital plan
that truck was slated to cost three4 of
a million dollars it almost cost I think
it was like 950 in the end uh because
cost went up and you know stuff happens
basically and we have to plan for the
future too so that makes sense to
me
okay the C yeah sorry flat on equipment
FL flat on road Improvement tree
removal Bunker Hill Bridge we zeroed
out uh I wanted to ask about the tree
removal real quick if it's okay how are
we doing Eric generally just you know
surface level quick quick comment like
how do you feel about where we are on
the
trees I think we've
been you know incredibly successful and
I look at that and I look and say
consistently on these big wind events
are we having major issues and the
answer is no whereas five years ago we
were and then I also look at because we
have five and a half miles rail trail
running through the town um and the
state does not proactively cut trees on
the rail trail and I look at it and say
how many trees do we have go down in
five miles of rail trail versus how many
do we have go down in 34 miles of our
town
roads and we tend to have less problems
on our total town roads than we have on
five miles of rail trail so I think
we're doing very well um but we're also
doing well because we're playing really
nicely with the utility company and
while you see a budget of
50,000 our annual expenditure on tree
removal the last bunch of years has been
more like between1 and
$120,000 in in tree removal um because
we're mobilizing with eversource in
conjunction with them and you know and
I'll back that up I mean I have lost
power
once in recent memory whereas it used to
be a a fairly consistent thing so uh no
I just wanted to double check on that
but yeah I I think that works that's
good so so I would just you know when I
look around Eric I still see a lot of
trees uh even on like Wheeling Road the
roads Drive the most but I see a lot of
ash trees and dead trees that worry me
that they may not fall on power lines so
maybe uh eversource isn't going to
address them but they certainly worry me
as far as falling on the road someone
could get killed quite easily it happens
so is there a plan in place to like
finish a lot of like remember they did
Wheeling Road years ago and there's a
few that we just stopped because we ran
out of money I guess I think you said to
me at one point and I'm just like
there's still dead standing there and
could fall on the street like so I'm
just wondering what the is $50,000
mostly for the rail trail or do we have
a plan to finish cleaning up a lot of
the Dead Road dead trees none of that
none of that 50,000 goes into the rail
trail um the only thing if we were to
address a tree on the rail trail it
would be because it's down and Public
Works can cut it up if we need money for
that's a state responsibility not a town
all our money goes into town roads not
not to the rail trail we may use a
little Manpower on the rail trail from
time to time but not not contractor
dollars um no so
we've we in the past we were using
distinctive tree care and we were doing
kind of big swaths where we had an
extraordinary number of dead trees in a
short distance and we we just took the
worst sections and went after them
section by section um and now we're
starting to get more
specific um and we're shifting and we've
been using a different tree company um
and just going after where we don't
necessarily have areas where we've got
hundred trees in a mile to take down
it's more efficient to use a regular
tree crew than distinctive with the big
grapple saw um and I think going forward
we're going to use a mix of both of
those um you know because either one
could be more cost effective depending
on where it is um we've had to spend a
lot of money um doing Cider Mill Road um
we had a ton of really large trees that
required a 100 foot bucket truck which
those are expensive per day um but it
was too tall for us to get with the
grapple um
if we'd have done it three years ago we
could have done it with the grapple
because the trees were
dead were dead but intact and now
they're more fragile and now if we grab
them with the with the grapple saw they
just tend to come apart um and we can't
you know lower them safely so we're
mixing and matching depending on exactly
where we are um you know but it's an
expensive proposition however we I think
we're doing a great job compared to all
our neighbors we've been very successful
with that tree program after over the
last four years to five
years it just seems like oh go ahead go
ahead Jo go bill because I have a
different fund you can ask about the
trees it just seems like it's not a lot
of money for the amount of trees that I
see that still need to be addressed
just doesn't seem like enough money
there it is scary when they're leaning
over I'm afraid they're going to fall on
someone or a car or something too I mean
if a cars going by and a tree falls man
hits the car you're dead it's I know
it's so scary you hear about it in other
towns are on a highway randomly and I
think of it too it's not
yeah
sure all right can I move on the the
other fund I was gonna ask real quick
Eric I know that this year we funded the
um Road Improvement is that yeah
you know level to last year what was
this past year I know we overspent and
had to transfer some
money what was that like
184 or was it one was it do you remember
the amount we transferred out of the
maybe the old library fund or something
I'm just
wondering yeah I want to say that was I
would have to look back to give you an
exact number I think that was about
140,000
okay y y because we got extra work done
I know it was in this current year that
we're in now this fiscal year um so
that's something to kind of think about
down the line depending on I know we
were ahead of the game with that because
we had to transfer money into it um all
right thank
you okay other
uh big one really we have going on here
the bridge and Culver funds so we've got
a 75% increase from 100,000 to
$175,000 of course the note here needed
for Lake Road of basa that culbert is in
bad shape and the plan was to replace
that um I don't know Eric anything more
to add to that no I mean
it's it's I was talking to the engineer
today um you know actually we were
discussing ways to reduce our survey
cost for that project which I think we
can save a little bit money on that it's
just replacing covers today is stupidly
expensive um you know and and the
requirements are just the old days of
digging a hole and dropping a couple
squash metal pipes in and uh you know
building a facade on each end and
calling it good are are done and over
with um I guess my only question is if
is this
enough you know is this the year to push
even a little bit
more given our sort of good luck with
the ram budget situation uh should it be
200,000 you know because this isn't
going away we have another project after
this one right no there's no no question
in in fact Public Works has been working
the last four days uh to repair damage
on a cover on uh Bunker Hill um
that has scoured out so badly we had to
go in and repair kind of the outfall of
the cover um we're going to face a fair
bit of expense for bridge and covers you
know for a bunch of years going forward
um you know there are kind of
three that are critical right now um
this this being one the second is the
one on Hutchinson Road um I think we
have a plan in place to get away without
replacing that Culvert by basically
convincing the state to allow us a curb
cut onto Hutchinson on the other side of
the cul and then basically just
abandoning the existing and removing the
existing Culver um you know because
there's so few houses back there it just
seems absurd to be spending you know one
or between1 and $22 million replacing a
covert that really only accommodates
several you know uh several properties
so as long as we can get them access in
the way right right and so if we can
come up with the workaround to dump them
off on Route Six further up we're going
to do that um and and just
not you know and then the next covert we
really need to go after is one of the
big ones on be Swamp Road um because
that one is failing um we've had sink
holes there before we're watching it but
we know that one is you know is in you
know pretty poor shape so after this one
gets funded um you know what I've been
talking with the engineer at Nathan
Jacobson is basically waiting at least a
year and then submitting to the state
local bridge program to replace that one
also um
uh so that as soon as we're we're done
with this one we already have the next
one pre-approved into the program and we
can start putting money aside for
that so yeah so yeah my my comment
remains basically just that I you know
not only am I in support of this
increase I just I wonder if it's even if
we should even go a little further but
that's my only that's my only thought um
we know we have all these issues coming
up
so
yeah I mean don't get me wrong I'd
prefer more money in that program Well
yeah if we get a budget past we we would
always like to put as much money as we
can but you know this is uh strikes me
as one of our biggest
needs
correct
yep any more comments here slight
reduction of the building M maintenance
fund um AES Capital fund we talked about
this before we voted to kind of fund
this out there's $100,000 in there and
50,000 in the open space fund to uh from
Planning and Zoning commission we think
we kind of talked about this in a prior
meeting as well did um I don't know if
anybody has any further questions on
that on those
items
Mark can I just sorry obviously I take
the meeting that I wasn't at the
beginning of the meeting but I figure
we're going over all the line items and
such and then I would think in a next
meeting we we're all going to give our
thoughts on things overall I mean we're
just kind of I'm not taking this as to
I'm rubber stamping everything I'm
getting an overview of everything and
then I what I would suggest is if we go
along we did this in last week's meeting
if there was something that you know
people feel like really ought to be
adjusted let's do it let's adjust it
let's address it now um or you know we
can do it next next meeting too there's
doesn't have to be done this meeting but
I think if if anybody wanted to you know
make a suggestion we we made some see we
seem to have some consensus on a few
adjustments early in the beginning right
parts of the budget um but you know we
can we can certainly come back and
address it you know no I'm glad I was
able to say that I know I we did kind of
go along that way I think
I this is a lot of informational stuff
so yeah you know kind of digesting yeah
sorry time to think about it more too if
you if you want to do it talk well
digesting it all looking at the big
picture talking about it as a group I
mean all of us you know will have our
opinions on what we think you know so
that I wanted to ask you directly and it
seems like we can do that we're going
through all of this we'll all come back
with you know what we think um yeah I
think so we but and but if anybody had
any specific you know proposals to make
you know we could certainly talk about
those too but you know absolutely we can
continue to do it you know and I'll have
them reflective or whatever and it won't
be like every line or anything like that
no thank you I just want to I feel like
we've done that in Prior
years so you know with respect the briti
cul front I don't know that I'm ready to
make a motion around this or anything
but I guess I just Food For Thought for
everybody you know just based on the
needs that we know are coming down the
pike how do we feel about that number do
we think it's right do we think we wna
you know would it would it make sense to
entertain a motion to increase it to
200,000 or something like that just
kicking it around I again I don't have a
strong opinion at this moment but I just
have a doubt as to where we are with
that fund and given the cost increase
that we're seeing uh you know is that
enough I is basically my gut feel
especially in this budget cycle where we
we are in a reasonably good place in a
lot of other areas it's just my one I
agree with you Rob I think that's
another
one that that bridge and Culvert fund
should be increased not only for
contingency of what might happen but to
start putting even more money away for
the future um because these are
expensive and and if I mean Eric
hopefully we get the okay from the state
to you know take a cut on Route Six um
but if that didn't happen and we had to
do that project wow so it just see it
seems to make more sense I'm not a that
guy that likes to spend more money but
sometimes you just have to and that's
one of the places I would think I'm in
agreement with Rob as far as that
goes I agree with Rob too and my my take
on this and why I asked the question
that's where we make our priority
decisions you know and something like
this because when we have our big
picture talks there's you know I have
had people come to me so I have thoughts
on the budget overall not in a big way
but we're going to make our push of what
we think we should do but I have no
problem with putting more money in that
too whatever is needed the most and
then when we get to our big talks or
what we think we want to put forth for
the town after we do job as the board of
finance and fine-tuning it and
everything maybe this would be you take
a little bit away from the roads that we
already had done ahead of time put that
extra money that you are because we had
to transfer such a big amount you know
kind of and then put it where we need it
we know those bridg and coverts are
needed so maybe deduct a little bit
there pad the other side I'm not saying
we can do that in every instance but in
this one it might work just a thought
yeah that's that's a fair point in in
that we did overex expend last year by
like 150k uh roughly speaking um I I
remember that transfer too I I thought
actually Jo I thought your number was
right but I think we might have been
plugging two different things and one of
them was the road over expenditure but
whatever it was it was in the 150 range
yeah yeah and I I on the flip side I
want to keep ahead of our roads because
I know we have plenty of work to do
there me too and that's why and and I'd
like Kim to be present too when we have
the big overall talk too because I think
she'll have some thoughts and that's why
you know I agree with you though I have
no problem putting more in that
one yeah I just that's the that's the
one fund of all of these that gives me
some concern going forward just based on
what Eric's telling us about the project
costs yeah and we've been talking for
years about being funded on our roads
and and bridges so yeah specifically the
culverts I mean it was a real jump uh
Eric came to us a year or two ago about
that um and you know we're just facing
the fact that a project that we would
expect to spend half a million dollars
on is now almost a million dollar
project that kind of thing so you know
we have to we have to plan for that but
other than that I mean I really kind of
like this budget I I think it's good
solid I think we've gone through we've
done a good cut at it and you know
that's one I would just flag as
everybody kind of just think about
and you know whether this is the year to
push a little bit on that and if we get
the town meeting and people are like
nope uh we you know we want to cut the
budget well there's a place we could
drop back if we have to um but right now
and it's already granted we're already
putting in a significant income increase
don't get me wrong but I feel like you
know just based on what we're hearing
from our experts on the matter uh you
know we're gonna have I don't want to
get in a position where we need to do a
bridge and we have to bond it or
something you
know y understood yeah so you know yeah
we are pretty much at the end of the
budget here um the mill rate
calculations are going to be they are so
we don't really need to worry too much
about those right now um just as a point
of procedure though I think one thing we
need to keep in mind is that we only
have we have two more meeting dates
before our town budget meeting so neck
we have next week the 17th and we have
our regular uh Board of Finance meeting
on the
24 one of those two one of those two
meetings needs to be a budget hearing so
it would either be next week or I guess
my preference would be the uh the
following week for the board of Finance
meeting that would give us an
opportunity to kind
of um finalize what we think would be
the proposed budget next week making any
motions to to make changes to that and
then have the hearing on the 24th um at
the board of Finance meeting then the
following week would be the public
meeting uh May 1st for the the town
budget meeting uh if the town if the
meeting pass if the budget passes at
that meeting then the referendum is the
14th 14th yes right so like a two we
yeah trigger yeah so we we basically
need to have a recommended budget uh by
the end of our meeting on the 24th I
think or or else we'll end up calling
some special meetings I think all of us
would prefer to avoid um I don't think
we're that far off so my guesses we'll
we'll be able to uh to zero in on a
proposed budget for the town budget
meeting as a meeting of the 24th so it
would be super ideal if we could get
Wally to come to our next meeting yeah
yeah I would agree if we can get him on
the 17th I don't does anybody else have
anybody uh anybody any other departments
or anything they feel like they need to
hear
from I don't think we identifi that's
the only one I got yeah and Eric I mean
uh mark would you mind uh is is the Bri
and cover one that you can highlight so
we remember to come back to that or like
we did lines
yeah 24th of April was going to be our
public budget hearing um that was my
assumption um which I might have to miss
by the way I apologize but um what date
is that 24th of April yeah I think
that's likely to be our budget hearing
and our kind of that's our first pass
through with the public and
unfortunately I may be able to make it
but I may have to miss it um I have my
kids that night
unexpectedly good yeah and I was going
to mention also I will not be available
for next week's budget so Joanne if you
could take the meeting I'll be on you're
not available next week when we're okay
the
17 17 I mean there's a there's a slight
chance that I might be able to join um
but you know honestly if if you guys
knock it out and you have the
um you know you have changes you want to
make and you get some agreement you know
you just make motions about accepting
those changes you know propos you know
to accept the budget as you know
currently shown and and you can go ahead
and and approve that um you know you
know certainly don't need it without me
you will need a quorum you need four
people there so as long as you have a
quorum you're you're good I'm good for
next week I just want to be clear two
weeks from now potential and again I'm
iffy I may be able to make
I I just have kid duty that night and
we'll see okay um and then I I should be
able to make the actual Town budget
meeting if every oh Joanne you mark
Joanne will have this uh this version of
the budget that's been marked up right
yeah I'll send it out to all of you
after the meeting
tonight shows the highlights and the
things we wanted to talk about Mark
before we close tonight just so that we
know where we stand right now are you
able to go on the mill rate calculation
tab for us real quick since we came to
the end yeah let's look at that agree
budget as and Eric is this up to date as
far as I don't think there's 1% little
less than
1% yeah that should be it should be
calculating through correctly
091 because I'm GNA be honest with
everyone that's here it's not people
would be happy that the budget's not and
clearly everybody got elected or put on
the board for a reason so I have to be
um true to the people that come to talk
to me about different things so since
everyone won't be here next week they
understand that there's not a huge
increase overall but they also you know
we have to keep in mind the spending
piece of it that once we higher than the
the mill rate increase is that what you
you're pointing to yeah I mean we just
want to be fair versus the.
n or just in general like you said like
we're this is a good year with ram being
low and all of those kind of things so
whatever we kind of marry align to or
decisions that are made down the line
it's harder to take it back once it's
come forward yeah I mean that's the
reason where I just personally speaking
this is where in years like this I like
to shovel money into Capital funds
because they're not operating budget
yeah understand Lally it because you can
always adjust that in a way that once
you've increased an OP budget and then
like things grow it's harder to to draw
back down where you know so no I I
absolutely hear you I agree so I just
think it's a good good debate we've all
been put on this board for our beliefs
and what we're gonna try to do and you
know with we all want what's best for
the town but I think it's always good to
have one open meeting and I know we've
been going Line to Line and saying that
I've been taking information in and
whoever can be there it's important that
we are there because that's why we're
elected and representing what we believe
in like Rob will always be strong and
I'm Gonna Be Strong um yeah that's all
yeah so Bill did you have something to
say if I could you could bill I was just
thinking you know if you look at the the
trend it it's gone pretty down over the
last you know we were
33.9 35.87 31 I mean we
shouldn't you know as we look forward
the the RAM and the the education budget
we know is going to increase because
there's going to be an increase in
student enrollment so you have to get
realistic this are the years years yeah
yeah I mean if you if if you keep trying
to go down it's gonna be all the harder
to swallow that big increase that's
coming down the road so I think Rob
you've talked about too these are the
years that you try to get some things
done and then you know those things get
done and the the the the mill rate is at
a reasonable res maybe it's 31 maybe
it's 32 whatever it is but when those
big increases come it's not GNA hurt as
much because you you've got a lot of
things done and now you use that money
for the ram increases or the the Board
of Ed increases so to me you know when
you look at where we were over the last
you know 33.9 35.7 listen I'm not
opponent of big taxes but this is not a
bad middle rate and I looked at a lot of
the towns around Connecticut this is not
a bad at all this and the reality is
that you know it interacts with our our
valuations and and you know what people
are actually paying taxes you know
depends on that but you're absolutely
right you know I agree with you on that
in that we have to pick our spots where
we can kind of smooth out right kind of
level loading the the ex we're gonna you
know there are years the last thing we
want is for everything to come to head
at once and go to the town with some
ridiculous you know 10%
increase and I agree with you guys I
definitely this is why I like healthy
debate or talking about it because I see
your vision and I understand it and I'm
also trying to align it with a few of
the things that I believe in too so
we're all gonna have we should
definitely keep you know our nickels and
dimes in a row and not overspent I mean
only because that's who put me on the
board you
know I had the the people L you got a
you got a comment I'm guys if I could
let her Speak oh okay
sorry don't think we're getting anything
substantive so yeah my question is to
Eric um as far as the coverts do you
anticipate anything coming down the pike
that will
probably use the extra money that we we
we might end up putting into
that oh
so so the next one after this after so
the the first thing is I don't want to
spend any more of I want to Grant fund
as much of the cost of replacing
culverts as I can so primarily we've
been looking at applications to the
What's called the state local bridge
program um I have looked at a couple
other funding
sources
um unfortunately most of the the other
federal and state funding sources all
require roads to be at least minor
collectors which is a problem for us
because we don't have the traffic volume
to justify that category so given that
we're looking at putting getting
projects qualified and into the state
local bridge program and writing Grant
applications for that and then as soon
as we get one in working to come up with
enough Capital to pay our half of it
because the state pays half and we pay
um I don't want to pay the full cost of
any large covert project because they're
just too damn
expensive um you know we're in a lot
better shape than a lot of people
because we have we at this
point um every large bridge that we have
is either redone since the mid 80s
um or is already in the federal local
bridge program with 100% funding so
compared to most municipalities we're
actually doing great so like yeah
there's some Doom and Gloom but it's not
nearly as bad as most towns um you know
and we haven't had any major wash outs
because we've been very proactive but
after this one we are going to have to
do the one on Swamp Road because that
one is failing the whole bottom of the
barrel uh is eaten away um and we've
been getting sink holes on that road
which we've patched and we've dealt with
and you know we might have to do a more
extensive repair similar to what we did
on Bunker Hill bridge but that one can't
go another 10 years I mean sometime in
that period we're going to replace it so
the goal is to get through Lake Road as
as fast as we can and immediately start
socking away money for uh you know for
Bunker
Hill we do have one thing going for us
and that in about four years after
lill uh Bridge has been replaced we will
have a pool of money that we can
repurpose for Bridges and covers because
the money we've been putting into the
bridge fund for Bunker Hill Bridge once
Bunker Hill is done you know we'll use
that money for the Long Hill bridge but
then we should get all of that back um
and we can use that for culs so so in
other words what I'm telling you is at
the rate we're going we're going to be
able to fund Lake Road at Bola and we're
going to be able to use a significant
portion of money the town already
has that's currently locked up in a
bridge fund that we have to do to pay
because the the way these programs work
is that we're obligated to pay the
contractor and then we get money back
from the state and federal government so
even though it's 100% funded we still
have to lay out the money and then wait
to get it back but eventually once we've
gotten it all back we will be able to
turn around and reuse that money for our
culverts if that makes sense yep what's
your take on on adding money into that
particular fund right now going up I
mean I think it makes sense if you think
you can get it through the budget okay
um and that's really the bottom line
should that fund should it be higher yes
um you know and that's one the
the yeah what's possible yeah so it's
Bas I agree and and I like all those
points what I guess I was basically
saying when we look at this page if
we're all not going to be here next week
we're you know we've got 600,000 we're
asking an increase in spending for the
town and I'm not saying any of this is
wrong I see the you know then you got
the school you know per the usual which
is understandable and then we're
actually using the fund balance this
year so that's another
150 so spending in general is up a lot
so just asking the town to digest the
the spending so we'll we'll back to it
next week but it is up
almost if I'm looking at this right
total back taxation is up by almost a
million so that's real um you know and
one thing I would add to that is that
there has been frustration at times in
town that we fund the town at such a
minimal level and everything gets thrown
at at Ed funding which you know you know
hey I got two kids I I I don't mind that
necessarily but it is a thing and here
we are we're taking the opportunity to
to kind of turn the tables on that so
that would be my argument but that said
I I too do not want in any way to lock
us
into higher spending that we then flail
around with three years from now or
something I don't want to do that um
which is why I focus on the
capital true that's that's all yeah no
good point because that can be adjusted
if need be when there's emergencies in
other areas right no it's all just good
thoughts and then we're all going to
have to Circle back to what we truly
believe in next week and then just go
from there yeah see what we feel we want
to bring before the town right I mean
that that's our last meeting before we
bring this before the public I've just
I've just had points bre brought to me
that they know that of course the board
of Selectmen and board of that are going
to bring their highest and best budgets
to us of course and they want the board
of Finance to do their due diligence
instead of just passing it into which we
are which we always do so that's all in
full transparency so if we all have that
food for thought of our overall thoughts
I mean last week there was debates about
the community center and the director so
we have to Circle back to that you know
be you know whether we're going to leave
everything on the table until the town
maybe that is the final decision so yeah
just one more good discussion question
about things and bring maybe things to
the table that people are not quite sure
of or want to make any adjustments or
entertain talk about it anyways is my
thought I'm good for now there's nothing
solid We're not gonna make any motions
anybody want to make a motion to
adjourn um you don't have to go to the
airport tonight D no I will be at the
airport next week though when I'm
supposed to going to be at the I have to
take my mother to the airport Friday
morning so I I feel your pain uh anyway
yes I will move I will move to a jurn
I'll second that a motion okay any other
discussion on the motion no all right
all those in favor say
I any
opposed oh sorry any
extensions okay thanks much I will
send this this updated spreadsheet and
as I said I won't be in the